VISION.md, before:

# 👁️ VISION.md - TRL-Bio-Compute

## 100 Yıllık Perspektif: Biyolojik Hesaplama Manifestosu

Silikon çağı, fiziğin sınırlarına çarpmak üzeredir. Moore Yasası'nın yavaşlaması bir son değil, biyolojik bir başlangıçtır.

### 🚀 Temel İlkelerimiz

1.  **Biyoloji Donanımdır:** Hücreler, milyarlarca yıllık optimize edilmiş nanoteknolojik fabrikalardır. Onları manipüle etmek değil, onlarla işbirliği yapmak zorundayız.
2.  **Sınırsız Veri:** DNA, evrendeki en yoğun ve en dayanıklı veri depolama ortamıdır. Geleceğin veri merkezleri soğuk sunucu odaları değil, biyo-havuzlar olacaktır.
3.  **Enerji Verimliliği:** İnsan beyninin 20W enerji ile başardığı karmaşık hesaplamaları, bir GPU çiftliği megawattlar harcayarak yapamıyor. "Energy-First" tasarım biyolojidedir.
4.  **Otonom Onarım:** Dijital sistemler bozulduğunda parça değişimi gerektirir; biyolojik sistemler ise kendini onarır.

### 🛣️ Yol Haritası (2025-2050)

-   **Faz 1 (Gözlem):** Mevcut TRL seviyelerinin analizi ve "Bio-Compute Matrix" oluşturulması. (Şu an buradayız)
-   **Faz 2 (Hibritleşme):** Silikon işlemcilerin yanına "Bio-Co-Processors" (Biyo-Ek İşlemciler) entegrasyonu.
-   **Faz 3 (Biyo-Yerel):** Tamamen biyolojik tabanlı, programlanabilir organizmaların veri işleme ve üretimde kullanılması.

---

*"Gelecek, onu kodlayanlarındır. Ve yaşamın kodu, bildiğimiz en güçlü dildir."*

Commit message:

Elite Expansion: Add Mermaid diagrams, DNA storage simulator, 100-year roadmap, and technical glossary. Elevate repo to world-class level.

VISION.md, after:

# 👁️ THE POST-SILICON MANIFESTO | VISION 2100

## The Exodus from Silicon

The history of computation has been a journey through materials: from gears to vacuum tubes, to silicon. We are now at the precipice of the **Biological Exodus**. The physical constraints of electrons—heat, size, and quantum tunneling—are forcing intelligence to return to its most efficient host: **Living Systems**.

### 🏛️ The Three Pillars of Bio-Sovereignty

1.  **Molecular Transcendence:** Moving data storage from volatile magnetic states to the molecular stability of DNA. Intelligence will no longer be something we *power*, but something that *exists* in the substrate of reality.
2.  **Cognitive Synthesis:** Transitioning from "Artificial Intelligence" to "Synthesized Life." We don't aim for human-like machines, but for machine-like organisms that handle our complexity with biological efficiency.
3.  **The Sovereign Genetic Stack:** Controlling the tools of life is the ultimate form of sovereignty. Future nations will be defined by their ability to archive their culture and logic in the biological medium.

### 🛣️ The Tactical Timeline (Century View)

```mermaid
timeline
    title 100-Year Bio-Digital Roadmap
    2025 - 2030 : TRL Analysis & Benchmarking : Hybrid Silicon-Bio Systems (Co-processors) : DNA Cold Storage Pilot
    2030 - 2050 : Organoid Intelligence (OI) : Wetware OS V1 : Commercial DNA Clouds : In-vivo Diagnostics
    2050 - 2075 : Sovereign Bio-Stacks : Autonomous Self-Repairing Harware : Post-Silicon Industrial Revolution
    2075 - 2100 : The Bio-Digital Convergence : Planetary-scale Biological Computation : Trans-human Data Integration
```

---

## 🔬 Core Strategic Domains

### 1. Wetware Operating Systems (WOS)
Just as Windows and Linux manage silicon, the WOS will manage cellular metabolic pathways. We are theorizing a system where "Kernel" operations are performed via **CRISPR-Cas9** interrupts and memory management is handled by **Peptide Folding**.

### 2. Biological Cloud Infrastructure
Data centers will evolve from heat-producing warehouses into self-cooling, nutrient-sustained "Algae Pools" or "DNA Vaults." This marks the end of the energy-crisis for global data.

---

*"We do not predict the future; we code it into the very cells of existence."*
